.TH PORTMON 8l "17th February r1.29
.SH NAME
.B portmon
- monitors the availability of a port on a remote host.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBportmon\fR [\fB-c \fI<config_file>\fR] [\fB-d\fR] [\fB-l\fR]
[\fB-r \fI<rcpt_email_addr>\fR] [\fB-v\fR]  <\fIclientid\fR>|\fB-V\fR
.br
.SH AVAILABILITY
.B portmon
is a Bourne shell script which should work equally well on all versions of UNIX,
Linux and Mac OS X.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B portmon
uses 
.B nmap
to check that a specified port is open on a remote host.
.LP
.B NB .
A short client id is normally given in preference to a host name on the 
command line. This is used to identify the configuration stanza in 
the configuration file which will have the required hostname or IP address.
If no configuration file is found or if the client id is not found in the
configuration file
.B portmon
will assume that \fIclientid=hostname\fR.
.LP
The script is designed to run silently in the background simply logging when
a port is noticed to be down and when recovery is noted. When the script
is terminated with SIGHUP or SIGTERM a trap ensures that the end of the
monitoring session is also logged.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B -c
Use the specified configuration file in preference to the default
\fI"/usr/local/etc/portmon.cf"\fR. If no configuration file is found the 
script will attempt to soldier on with the information it has from the 
command line.
.TP 5
.B -l
Use the local syslog facility to record the date and time that the
monitoring starts and ends. If the port goes down the time and 
date that port is first noted to be down is recorded. If the
port becomes available again this is also logged.
.TP 5
\fB-r \fR<email_address>\fR
Send alerts to the specified user address. This will be used in preference
to the recipient specified in the configuration file and is useful when testing
the script. If no recipient is specified either on the command line nor in
the configuration file
.B portmon 
will send alerts to the invoking user's local mailbox. 
.LP
NB. This functionality is not yet available.
.TP 5
\fB-d\fR
Start in debug mode. The \fB-x\fR option is set within the shell.
.TP
.B -v
Set verbose mode. Ordinarily 
.B portmon
operates silently unless show stopping problems are detected. In 
.I verbose
mode 
.B portmon
reports starting, stopping and port availability to screen. 
.TP 5
\fB-V\fR
Print the \fIportmon\fR version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.IP
.ft CW
portmon -l -v merlin &
.ft R
.LP
Check that the port specified in the default configuration file,
.I "/usr/local/portmon.cf" ,
is available on the host merlin. Whenever it is noted that
the port goes down or recovers this is also logged 
using the local
.B syslog
facility.
.LP
Verbose mode will be used causing
.B portmon
to report the port's availability to standard error.
.LP
.ft CW
portmon www.fulford.net &
.ft R
.LP
The script will check the configuration file for the client id
"www.fulford.net".
If no entry is found, as seems likely, "www.fulford.net" will be
assumed to be a hostname and 
.B nmap
will be run with the "\fI-Pn\fR" option. By default port 80 will be
specified.
.SH BUGS
The script is quite crude having very little error checking. The consequences
of unexpected input are untested. Where multiple ports are checked if any are
open this is reported as success. This needs dealing with urgently.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR chkdf ,
.IR chkftpd ,
.IR chkfw ,
.IR clean ,
.IR secscan .
.SH AUTHOR
Clifford W Fulford, City Linux. Contact fulford@fulford.net or +44 (0)709 229 5385.
.SH HISTORY
